# IANA Considerations

Although the NSEC4 and NSEC4PARAM RR formats include a hash algorithm
parameter, this document does not define a particular mechanism for
safely transitioning from one NSEC4 hash algorithm to another. When
specifying a new hash algorithm for use with NSEC4, a transition
mechanism MUST also be defined.

This document updates the IANA registry "DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM PARAMETERS"
(http://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-parameters) in sub-registry "TYPES",
by defining two new types. [](#the-nsec4-resource-record) defines the
NSEC4 RR type [TBD]. [](#the-nsec4param-resource-record) defines the
NSEC4PARAM RR type [TBD].

This document possibly updates the IANA registry
"DNS SECURITY ALGORITHM NUMBERS -- per [](#RFC4035)"
(http://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-sec-alg-numbers). 

This document creates a new IANA registry for NSEC4 flags. This
registry is named "DNSSEC NSEC4 Flags". The initial contents of this
registry are:

      0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
    |    |    |    |    |    |    |Wild|Opt-|
    |    |    |    |    |    |    |card|Out |
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

    bit 6 is the Wildcard flag.

    bit 7 is the Opt-Out flag.

    bits 0 - 5 are available for assignment.

Assignment of additional NSEC4 Flags in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).

This document creates a new IANA registry for NSEC4PARAM flags. This
registry is named "DNSSEC NSEC4PARAM Flags". The initial contents of
this registry are:

      0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 0 |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

    bit 7 is reserved and must be 0.

    bits 0 - 6 are available for assignment.

Assignment of additional NSEC4PARAM Flags in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).

Finally, this document creates a new IANA registry for NSEC4 hash
algorithms. This registry is named "DNSSEC NSEC4 Hash Algorithms".
The initial contents of this registry are:

    0 is Zero hashing.

    1 is SHA-1.

    2-255 Available for assignment.

Assignment of additional NSEC4 hash algorithms in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).
