# Introduction

The Domain Name System Security (DNSSEC) Extensions introduced the NSEC
resource record for authenticated denial of existence, and the NSEC3
resource record for hashed authenticated denial of existence.  This document
introduces an alternative resource record, DNSNXT, which similarly provides 
authenticated denial of existence. It permits gradual expansion of
delegation-centric zones, just like NSEC3 does. 
With DNSNXT it is possible, but not required, to provide 
measures against zone enumeration.

DNSNXT reduces the size of the denial of existence response and
adds Opt-Out to unhashed names. DNSNXT unifies NSEC and NSEC3.

## Rationale

Hashed authenticated denial of existence proofs hinge on the 
closest encloser proof (Section 7.2.1 and 8.3 of [](#RFC5155) and [](#RFC7129)).
When validating
a hashed denial of existence response, a validator must deny or assert the
presence of a next closer name and a wildcard name. A validator can derive
these names from the closest encloser.

This is why most of the denial of existence responses with
NSEC3 contain three records:

1. A record which matches the closest encloser, this tells the validator
   what the (unhashed) name of the closest encloser is;
1. A record which covers or matches the next closer, to deny or assert the
   existence of the next closer name;
1. A record which covers or matches the wildcard, to deny or assert 
   wildcard synthesis. The validator needs to know the closest encloser to 
   construct the source of synthesis.

This document presents a new record, DNSNXT, that is similar to NSEC3,
but differs in the following ways:

* It provides a new way to deny the existence of the wildcard,
  by introducing the Wildcard flag (described in [](#wildcard-flag)). This
  bit makes the third record (and its RRSIG), from the list above, redundant;
* It allows for unhashed records, by introducing an Identity function
  (described in [](#hash-algorithm)).

With DNSNXT you will get a maximum of two records for any denial
of existence response, saving one record and accompanying signature(s) compared
to NSEC3.

By defining an Identity function, we also fold back NSEC into DNSNXT and
add Opt-out to unhashed names. With this change we collapse NSEC
and NSEC3 into one new record to leave only one form of authenticated
denial of existence in the DNS.

## Requirements

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [](#RFC2119).

## Terminology

The reader is assumed to be familiar with the basic DNS and DNSSEC
concepts described in [](#RFC1034), [](#RFC1035), [](#RFC4033), [](#RFC4034),
[](#RFC4035), and subsequent RFCs that update them: [](#RFC2136),
[](#RFC2181), [](#RFC2308) and [](#RFC5155). A good explanation on how authenticated
denial of existence works can be found in [](#RFC7129).

Furthermore, the same terminology is used throughout this document as is
described in Section 1.3 from [](#RFC5155), with the following changes:

Original owner name:

:   the owner name corresponding to a hashed owner name if hashing is used. Or
    the owner name as-is if no hashing is used.

Opt-Out DNSNXT RR:

:   an DNSNXT RR that has the Opt-Out flag set to 1.

Wildcard DNSNXT RR:

:   an DNSNXT RR that has the Wildcard flag set to 1.

Opt-Out zone:

:   a zone with at least one Opt-Out DNSNXT RR.

Base32:

:   the "Base 32 Encoding with Extended Hex Alphabet" as specified
    in [](#RFC4648). Note that trailing padding characters ("=") are
    not used in the DNSNXT specification.

To cover:

:   an DNSNXT RR is said to "cover" a name if the (hashed) name or (hashed) next closer name falls between
    the owner name of the DNSNXT RR and the next (hashed) owner name of the DNSNXT. In other words, if
    it proves the nonexistence of the name, either directly or by proving the
    nonexistence of an ancestor of the name.

To match:

:   When a hash algorithm is defined, an DNSNXT RR is said to "match" a name
    if the owner name of the DNSNXT RR is the same as the hashed owner name
    of that name. When no hash algorithm (Identity function) is defined, an DNSNXT RR is said to
    "match" a name if the name and the owner name of the DNSNXT RR are equal.

Identity function:

:   Perform no hashing. Leave the name as-is.

# Experimental Status

This document describes an EXPERIMENTAL extension to DNSSEC.
It interoperates with non-experimental DNSSEC using the technique
described in [](#RFC4955).  This experiment is identified with the
following private algorithm (using algorithm PRIVATEDNS):

* Algorithm `5.dnsnxt.nlnetlabs.nl.`, is an alias for algorithm 5, RSASHA1.

Servers wishing to sign and serve zones that utilize DNSNXT MUST sign
the zone with this private algorithm and MUST NOT use any other algorithms.

Resolvers MUST NOT apply DNSNXT validation described in this document
unless a response contains RRSIGs created with this private algorithm.

# The DNSNXT Resource Record

The DNSNXT RR provides authenticated denial of existence for DNS RRsets.

The DNSNXT RR lists RR types present at the original owner name of the DNSNXT RR.
It includes the next (hashed) owner name in the canonical order of the zone.
The complete set of DNSNXT RRs in a zone indicates which RRSets exist for the
original owner name of the RR and form a chain. This information is used to
provide authenticated denial of existence for DNS data. To provide protection
against zone enumeration, the owner names used in the DNSNXT RR can be
cryptographic hashes of the original owner name prepended as a single label
to the name of the zone. The DNSNXT RR indicates which
hash function (if any) is used to construct the hash, which salt is used, and how many
iterations of the hash function are performed over the original owner name.

The hashing technique is the same as with NSEC3 and is described in
Section 5 of [](#RFC5155). NSEC3 creates hashes for empty non-terminals, DNSNXT
does the same, even when the Identity function is in use.

(Hashed) owner names of unsigned delegations may be excluded from the chain.
An DNSNXT RR whose span covers an owner name or next closer name of an
unsigned delegation is referred to as an Opt-Out DNSNXT RR and is indicated by
the presence of a flag.

If hashing is in use, the owner name for the DNSNXT RR is the base32 encoding
of the hashed owner name prepended as a single label to the name of the zone.
If hashing is not in use, the other name of the DNSNXT RR is the unmodified domain
name.

The type value for the DNSNXT RR is [TBD].

The DNSNXT RR RDATA format is class independent and is described below.

The class MUST be the same as the class of the original owner name, in case the
original owner name is being hashed.

The DNSNXT RR SHOULD have the same TTL value as the SOA minimum TTL field.
This is in the spirit of negative caching [](#RFC2136).

## RDATA Fields

The DNSNXT RDATA has many similarities with the NSEC3 RDATA, but there are
differences:

* There is an extra flag bit reserved to indicate whether wildcard synthesis
  is possible (e.g. does a wildcard domain name exist that is immediately
  descending from the original owner name?);
* The hash length does not need to be stored, as all domain names are 
  stored as domain names, not raw hashes.

### Hash Algorithm

[](#RFC5155) defines the NSEC3 hash algorithm registry. Hash algorithm
0 is reserved. For DNSNXT we define hash algorithm 0 to be the Identity function,
meaning that no hashing is used.

### Flags

The Flags field is identical to the Flags field as defined in [](#RFC5155).
This specification adds a new flag, the Wildcard Flag.

#### Opt-Out Flag

Like the Opt-Out Flag defined in Section 3.1.2.1 of [](#RFC5155).

#### Wildcard Flag

The Wildcard Flag indicates whether there is wildcard synthesis possible
(e.g. does a wildcard domain name exist that is immediately descending from
the original owner name of the DNSNXT?).

If the Wildcard flag is set, wildcard synthesis is possible.

If the Wildcard flag is clear, wildcard synthesis is not possible.

### Iterations

The Iterations field defines the number of additional times the hash
function has been performed.  More iterations result in greater
resiliency of the hash value against dictionary attacks, but at a
higher computational cost for both the server and resolver, therefor this field
has been limited to one octet.

### Salt Length

Like the Salt Length field defined in Section 3.1.4 of [](#RFC5155).

### Salt

Like the Salt field defined in Section 3.1.5 of [](#RFC5155).

### Next (Hashed) Owner Name

The Next Owner Name field contains the next owner name that exists in the
definition of Section 2.2.3 of [](#RFC4592).

The field contains the next owner name in the
canonical ordering of the zone, as explained in Section 6.1 of [](#RFC4034).

A sender MUST NOT use DNS name compression on the Next Owner Name field when
transmitting an DNSNXT RR.

Owner names of RRsets for which the given zone is not authoritative
(such as glue records) MUST NOT be listed in the Next Owner Name,
unless at least one authoritative RRset exists at the same owner name.

### Type Bit Maps

Like the Type Bit Maps field defined in Section 3.1.8 of [](#RFC5155).

## DNSNXT RDATA Wire Format

The RDATA of the DNSNXT RR is as shown below.

                         1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |   Hash Alg.   |     Flags     |  Iterations   | Salt Length   |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    /                            Salt                               /
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    /                 Next (Hashed) Owner Name                      /
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    /                         Type Bit Maps                         /
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
^[fig:dnsnxt-wire::The DNSNXT on-the-wire format.]

Hash Algorithm is a single octet. 
If Hash Algorithm is zero (Identity function), the Iterations field,
the Salt Length field and the Salt field MUST be ignored.

Flags field is a single octet. The following one-bit flags are defined:

     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |           |W|O|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

* O - Opt-Out flag
* W - Wildcard flag

Iterations is represented as a unsigned octet.

Salt Length is represented as an unsigned octet.  Salt Length
represents the length of the Salt field in octets.  If the value is
zero, the following Salt field is omitted.

Salt, if present, is encoded as a sequence of binary octets.  The
length of this field is determined by the preceding Salt Length
field.

If Hash Algorithm is not zero, the Next (Hashed) Owner Name is a base32
encoded domain name of the hashed next owner name prepended as a single
label to the name of the zone. 
If Hash Algorithm is zero it is a plain domain name.

The Type Bit Maps encode the existing types at the original owner name
that matches the DNSNXT RR.

### Type Bit Maps Encoding

The encoding of the Type Bit Maps field is the same as that used by the
NSEC and NSEC3 RR, described in [](#RFC4034), as well as in [](#RFC5155).

## Presentation Format

The presentation format of the RDATA portion is as follows:

* The Hash Algorithm field is represented as an unsigned decimal
    integer. The value has a maximum of 255.

* The Flags field is represented as an unsigned decimal integer.
    The value has a maximum of 255.

* The Iterations field is represented as an unsigned decimal
    integer. The value is between 0 and 255, inclusive.

* The Salt Length field is not represented.

* The Salt field is represented as a sequence of case-insensitive
  hexadecimal digits.  Whitespace is not allowed within the
  sequence.  The Salt field is represented as "-" (without the
  quotes) when the Salt Length field has a value of 0.

* The Next (Hashed) Owner Name field is represented as a domain name.

* The Type Bit Maps field is represented as a sequence of RR type
  mnemonics.  When the mnemonic is not known, the TYPE
  representation as described in Section 5 of [](#RFC3597) MUST be
  used.

### Examples

NSEC record:

    example. NSEC a.example NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY NSEC

The same data shown as an NSEC3 record:

    3msev9usmd4br9s97v51r2tdvmr9iqo1.example. NSEC3 1 0 0 - (
                        6cd522290vma0nr8lqu1ivtcofj94rga 
                        NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY NSEC3PARAM )

As an DNSNXT record with Identity function:

    example. DNSNXT 0 0 0 - a.example. NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY DNSNXT DNSNXTPARAM

And as an DNSNXT record with SHA1 hashing:

    3msev9usmd4br9s97v51r2tdvmr9iqo1.example. DNSNXT 1 0 0 - (
                 6cd522290vma0nr8lqu1ivtcofj94rga.example. 
                 NS SOA RRSIG DNSKEY DNSNXTPARAM )

# The DNSNXTPARAM Resource Record

DNSNXTPARAM is almost identical to NSEC3PARAM described in Section 5 of [](#RFC5155),
except the type code used [TBD] is that of DNSNXTPARAM and the Iteration field is an
octet.

## DNSNXTPARAM RDATA Wire Format

The RDATA of the DNSNXTPARAM RR is as shown below:

                        1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Hash Alg.   |     Flags     |  Iterations   | Salt Length   |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                             Salt                              /
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
^[fig:dnsnxtparam-wire::The DNSNXTPARAM on-the-wire format.]

Hash Algorithm is a single octet.

Flags field is a single octet.

Iterations is a single octet.

Salt Length is represented as an unsigned octet.  Salt Length
represents the length of the following Salt field in octets.  If the
value is zero, the Salt field is omitted.

Salt, if present, is encoded as a sequence of binary octets.  The
length of this field is determined by the preceding Salt Length
field.

##  Presentation Format

The presentation format of the RDATA portion is as follows:

The Hash Algorithm field is represented as an unsigned decimal
integer.  The value has a maximum of 255.

The Flags field is represented as an unsigned decimal integer.
The value has a maximum value of 255.

The Iterations field is represented as an unsigned decimal
integer.  The value is between 0 and 255, inclusive.

The Salt Length field is not represented.

The Salt field is represented as a sequence of case-insensitive
hexadecimal digits.  Whitespace is not allowed within the
sequence.  This field is represented as "-" (without the quotes)
when the Salt Length field is zero.

# Opt-Out

This specification adds Opt-Out as described in Section 6 of [](#RFC5155).
Because of the Identity function, this allows for Opt-Out being used with
unhashed names. A similar method is described in [](#RFC4956), but with
DNSNXT we can reuse the Opt-Out bit from the Flags field. 


# Empty non-terminals

With NSEC3, every empty non-terminal will have a NSEC3 record. This
is mentioned in [](#RFC5155), for instance in
section 7.1, the second bullet point:

> Each empty non-terminal MUST have a corresponding NSEC3 RR, unless
> the empty non-terminal is only derived from an insecure delegation
> covered by an Opt-Out NSEC3 RR.

This is a crucial difference with respect to NSEC, where no such provision
exists.

With DNSNXT we unify NSEC and NSEC3 and consequently, each empty non-terminal
will get an DNSNXT record (see [](#zone-signing), the 6th bullet). Furthermore,
DNSNXT represents the next owner name as a domain name, like NSEC, while
NSEC3 represents the next name as an unmodified binary hash value.

Due to these changes, we can revert back to canonical ordering for DNSNXT.
This greatly simplifies the comparison code, because there is only one ordering mechanism.

# Authoritative Server Considerations

## Zone Signing

Zones using DNSNXT must satisfy the same properties as described in 
Section 7.1 of [](#RFC5155), with NSEC3 replaced by DNSNXT.

In addition, for each original owner name that has a wildcard domain name
immediately descending from the original owner name,
the corresponding DNSNXT RR MUST have the Wildcard bit set in the Flags field.

The following steps describe one possible method of proper construction of
DNSNXT RRs.

1.  Select the hash algorithm and the values for salt and iterations;

2.  For each unique original owner name in the zone add an DNSNXT RR;
    * If Opt-Out is being used, owner names of unsigned delegations MAY be excluded;
    * The owner name of the DNSNXT RR is either the hash of the original owner name, prepended as a single label to the zone name, or is equal to the original owner name if Identity function is used;
    * The Next Owner Name field is left blank for the moment;
    * If Opt-Out is being used, set the Opt-Out bit to one.

3.  For collision detection purposes, if hashing is used, optionally keep
    track of the original owner name with the DNSNXT RR. Create an additional
    DNSNXT RR corresponding to the original owner name with the asterisk label
    prepended. Mark this DNSNXT RR as temporary;

4.  If the original owner name is a wildcard domain name (Section 2.1.1. of [](#RFC4592)), 
    mark the DNSNXT to be an DNSNXT RR that is matching a wildcard; 

4.  For each RRSet at the original owner name, set the corresponding
    bit in the Type Bit Maps field;

5.  Additional DNSNXT RRs need to be added for every empty non-terminal
    between the apex and the original owner name. If hashing is used,
    optionally keep track of the original owner names of these DNSNXT RRs and
    create temporary DNSNXT RRs for wildcard collisions in a similar fashion
    to step 3;

6.  Sort the set of DNSNXT RRs into canonical order.

7.  Combine DNSNXT RRs with identical owner names by replacing
    them with a single DNSNXT RR with the Type Bit Maps field
    consisting of the union of the types represented by the set of DNSNXT RRs. 
    If hashing is used and the original owner name was tracked, then collisions
    may be detected when combining, as all of the matching DNSNXT RRs should
    have the same original owner name. If a hash collision is detected, then a 
    new salt has to be chosen, and the signing process is restarted.
    Discard any possible temporary DNSNXT RRs;

8.  In each DNSNXT RR, insert the next (hashed) owner name by using the
    domain name of the next DNSNXT RR in
    canonical order. The next (hashed) owner
    name of the last DNSNXT RR in the zone contains the value of the
    (hashed) owner name of the first DNSNXT RR in canonical order.

    If the DNSNXT is marked to be matching a wildcard, find the DNSNXT that
    matches the closest encloser. Set the Wildcard bit in the Flags field
    of that DNSNXT;

9.  Finally, add an DNSNXTPARAM RR with the same Hash Algorithm,
    Iterations, and Salt fields to the zone apex.

## Zone Serving

This specification modifies DNSSEC-enabled DNS responses generated by
authoritative servers. In particular, it replaces the use of NSEC or
NSEC3 RRs in such responses with DNSNXT RRs.

### Denial of Wildcard Synthesis Proof

Instead of wasting a whole denial of existence RR to deny a wildcard, we have
introduced a bit in the Flags field of the DNSNXT RR that indicates whether
wildcard synthesis was possible because there exists a wildcard domain name
immediately descending from the original owner name.

The Denial of Wildcard Synthesis proof consists of one DNSNXT RR, that
matches some domain name, and that has the Wildcard bit clear.

Note that without much knowledge of the original owner name, this proof is not really
useful. In particular, we don't know if this is the wildcard synthesis that
we are looking for. This changes if we combine this proof with the
closest encloser proof.

### Closest Encloser Proof

For some DNSNXT responses, namely Name Error Response ([](#name-error-responses))
and Referrals to Unsigned Subzones ([](#referrals-to-unsigned-subzones)),
a proof of the closest encloser is required.
This is a proof that some ancestor of the QNAME is the closest encloser of QNAME.
The proof is described in Section 7.2.1 of [](#RFC5155), and is the same
for DNSNXT.

### Denial of Source of Synthesis Proof

The denial of wildcard synthesis proof combined with the closest encloser proof
results in a denial of source of synthesis proof. The source of synthesis is
defined in [](#RFC4592) as the wildcard domain name immediately descending from
the closest encloser.

The Denial of Source of Synthesis proof consists of (up to) two DNSNXT RRs,
the same that constructed the closest encloser proof:

* an DNSNXT RR that matches the closest encloser, and that has the Wildcard bit
  clear in the Flags field;
* an DNSNXT RR that covers the next closer name to the closest encloser.

The first DNSNXT RR essentially proves that the encloser exists, and that no
wildcard synthesis at the encloser is possible.
The second DNSNXT RR proves that the encloser is the closest, thus the
denial of the wildcard synthesis is the denial of the source of synthesis.

### Name Error Responses

If the zone does not contain any RRsets matching QNAME either exactly or
via wildcard name expansion, then the name server must include proof that:

* there is no exact match for QNAME;
* the zone contains no RRsets that would match QNAME via wildcard name
  expansion.

With NSEC, the server includes in the response an NSEC RR that covers QNAME,
and an NSEC RR that covers the wildcard RR at the closest encloser.

With NSEC3, the server includes in the response an NSEC3 RR that covers the
next closer, an NSEC3 RR that covers the wildcard RR at the closest
encloser, and an NSEC3 RR that matches the closest encloser.

To prove the nonexistence of QNAME with DNSNXT, the server MUST include a
denial of source of synthesis proof. This collection of (up to) two DNSNXT RRs
proves both that QNAME does not exist and that a wildcard that could have
matched QNAME also does not exist.

### No Data Responses

#### QTYPE is not DS

When a NODATA response needs to be returned, it is safe to say that QNAME
exists. Similar to NSEC and NSEC3, server MUST include the DNSNXT RR that
matches QNAME. This DNSNXT RR MUST NOT have the bits corresponding to either
the QTYPE or CNAME set in its Type Bit Maps field.

#### QTYPE is DS

Because of Opt-Out, the response can be different when QTYPE is DS. If no
DNSNXT RR matches QNAME, the server MUST return a closest provable encloser
proof for QNAME. The DNSNXT RR that covers the next closer name MUST have
the Opt-Out bit set.

Note that we do not need to ensure the denial of source of synthesis proof,
because a DS RRset next to a wildcard is meaningless (Section 4.6, [](#RFC4592)).

### Wildcard Answer Responses

If the zone does not contain any RRsets matching QNAME, but there is
wildcard name expansion possible then the name server must include proof
that the wildcard match was valid. This proof is accomplished by proving
that QNAME does not exist and that the closest encloser of QNAME and the
immediate ancestor of the wildcard are equal.

Both with NSEC and NSEC3, the server includes in the response an NSEC RR
that covers the next closer. It is not necessary to return a RR that
matches the closest encloser, as the existence of this closest encloser
is proven by the presence of the expanded wildcard in the response.

To prove that the wildcard name expansion was valid with DNSNXT,
the server MUST include in the response an DNSNXT RR that covers the
next closer. For the same reasons as with NSEC and NSEC3, it is not necessary
to return a RR that matches the closest encloser.

### Wildcard No Data Responses

With NSEC, the server includes in the response an NSEC RR that matches the
wildcard, in addition to the NSEC RR that covers the next closer. The
NSEC RR does not have the bits corresponding to QTYPE or CNAME set in its
Type Bit Maps field.

Again, with NSEC3, the server includes in the response an NSEC3 RR that
matches the wildcard, in addition to the NSEC3 RR that covers the next
closer. The NSEC3 RR does not have the bits corresponding to QTYPE or
CNAME set in its Type Bit Maps field. Besides that, an NSEC3 RR that
matches the closest encloser is included, because there was no expanded
wildcard in the response that can be used to determine the closest
encloser.

[](#RFC5155) already notes that the closest encloser to QNAME must be the
immediate ancestor of the wildcard RR, which is also defined in [](#RFC4592).
A closest encloser proof is not necessitated.

To prove the wildcard no data response with DNSNXT, the server MUST include
in the response an DNSNXT RR that matches the wildcard, and an DNSNXT RR that
covers the next closer. The closest encloser can be derived from the DNSNXT RR
that matches the wildcard. From that, the next closer can be derived.

### Referrals to Unsigned Subzones

If there is an DNSNXT RR that matches the delegation name, then that
DNSNXT RR MUST be included in the response. The DS and CNAME bit in the type
bit maps of the DNSNXT RR must not be set (by definition).

If the zone is Opt-Out, then there may not be an DNSNXT RR corresponding to
the delegation. In this case, the closest provable encloser proof MUST be
included in the response. The included DNSNXT RR that covers the next closer
name for the delegation MUST have the Opt-Out flag set to one.

Note that with the Identity function, the DNSNXT RR that matches the closest provable
encloser does not need to be included in the response, as it can be
derived from the DNSNXT that covers the next closer name.

### Responding to Queries for DNSNXT Only Owner Names

When DNSNXT hashing is in effect the paradox (DNSNXT records
deny their own existence) described in Section 7.2.8 of [](#RFC5155)
is back. When the Identity function is used, there is no paradox. 
In light of this, queries for the DNSNXT resource type are handled in the
same way as normal queries. Resolvers initiating these queries
SHOULD disregard any information learned from the returned DNSNXT records.

### Server Response to a Run-Time Collision

The same considerations as described in Section 7.2.9 of [](#RFC5155) for
NSEC3 apply to DNSNXT.

## Secondary Servers

The same considerations as described in Section 7.3 of [](#RFC5155) for
NSEC3 and NSEC3PARAM apply to DNSNXT and DNSNXTPARAM.

## Zones Using Unknown Hash Algorithms

The same considerations as described in Section 7.4 of [](#RFC5155) for
NSEC3 apply to DNSNXT.

## Dynamic Update

A zone signed using DNSNXT may accept dynamic updates [](#RFC2136).
However, DNSNXT introduces some special considerations for dynamic updates.

Adding and removing names in a zone MUST account for the creation or
removal of empty non-terminals, similar to [](#RFC5155), Section 7.5.

The presence of Opt-Out in a zone means that some additions or removals of
unsigned delegations of names will not require changes to the DNSNXT RRs in a
zone. The same considerations as in [](#RFC5155), Section 7.5 for NSEC3 apply
for DNSNXT.

The presence of Opt-Out in a zone means that when adding or removing
DNSNXT RRs, the value of the Opt-Out flag that should be set in new or
modified DNSNXT RRs is ambiguous. Servers SHOULD follow the set of
basic rules to resolve the ambiguity, as described in [](#RFC5155),
Section 7.5.

Adding and removing wildcard names in a zone MUST account for the setting
or clearing of the Wildcard bit in the Flags field:

* When adding a wildcard name, the DNSNXT RR that matches the immediate
  parent of the wildcard MUST set the Wildcard bit in the Flags field;

* When deleting a wildcard name, the DNSNXT RR that matches the immediate
  parent of the wildcard MUST clear the Wildcard bit in the Flags field.

# Validator Considerations

## Responses with Unknown Hash Types

A validator MUST ignore DNSNXT RRs with unknown hash types.  The
practical result of this is that responses containing only such DNSNXT
RRs will generally be considered bogus.

## Verifying DNSNXT RRs

A validator MUST ignore the undefined bits (0-5) in the Flags field of
DNSNXT RRs.

A validator MAY treat a response as bogus if the response contains
DNSNXT RRs that contain different values for hash algorithm,
iterations, or salt from each other for that zone.

## Validating Name Error Responses

A validator MUST verify that there is a closest encloser for QNAME present
in the response. A validator MUST verify that the Wildcard bit is clear in
the Flags field of the DNSNXT RR that matches the closest encloser.

> Note: In denial of existence responses, the Wildcard flag
> will never be set. Setting the bit indicated that wildcard
> synthesis is possible at the closest encloser. Obviously,
> that contradicts with the denial of existence of the query
> name. Nevertheless, a validator must verify that the Wildcard
> bit is clear. If a validator fails to check the bit, it is
> vulnerable to replay attacks. For example, if you do not check
> the Wildcard Flag in the example.com DNSNXT (but *.example.com
> does exist), an attacker can use the record to deny names that
> would otherwise match the wildcard name. 

In order to find the closest encloser, the validator MUST find the longest
name, X, such that X is an ancestor of QNAME that is matched by an DNSNXT RR
present in the response.

One possible algorithm for finding the closest encloser is as follows:

1. Set SNAME=QNAME;
2. If there is an DNSNXT RR in the response that matches SNAME, then we have found the closest encloser;
3. Truncate SNAME by one label from the left, go to step 2.

Once the closest encloser has been discovered, the validator MUST
check that the DNSNXT RR that has the closest encloser as the original
owner name is from the proper zone. The DNAME type bit MUST NOT be set and
the NS type bit MUST be clear if the SOA type bit is clear.

If this is not the case, it would be an indication that an attacker is
using them to falsely deny the existence of RRs for which the server is
not authoritative.

In addition, the validator MUST verify that there is an DNSNXT RR that covers
the next closer name.

## Validating No Data Responses

If QTYPE is not DS, a validator MUST verify that an DNSNXT RR that matches
QNAME is present and that both the QTYPE and the CNAME type are not set in
its Type Bit Maps field.

Note that this test also covers the case where the DNSNXT RR exists because
it corresponds to an empty non-terminal, in which case the DNSNXT RR will
have an empty Type Bit Maps field.

If QTYPE is DS, and there is an DNSNXT RR that matches QNAME present in the
response, then that DNSNXT RR MUST NOT have the bits corresponding to DS and
CNAME set in its Type Bit Maps field.

If there is no such DNSNXT RR, then the validator MUST verify that there is
a closest provable encloser for QNAME present in the response. The closest
provable encloser is found in a similar way as the closest encloser.
In addition, the validator MUST verify that there is an DNSNXT RR that covers
the next closer name and has the Opt-Out bit set.

## Validating Wildcard Answer Responses

The verified wildcard answer RRSet in the response provides the validator
with a closest encloser for QNAME. The validator can do so by checking the
label count in the RRSIG and the number of labels in the answer's owner name.

The validator MUST verify that there is an DNSNXT RR that covers the
next closer name to QNAME is present in the response. This proves that QNAME
itself did not exist and that the correct wildcard was used to generate the
response.

## Validating Wildcard No Data Responses

The validator MUST verify that there is an DNSNXT RR present in the response
that matches the source of synthesis. 

In order to find the source of synthesis, the validator MUST find the longest
name, X, such that X is an ancestor of QNAME and that *.X is matched by a
DNSNXT RR present in the response.

One possible algorithm for finding the source of synthesis is as follows:

1.  Set SNAME=QNAME;
2.  Truncate SNAME by one label from the left. This is a candidate for the
    closest encloser;
3.  Set WNAME to be SNAME with the asterisk label prepended: WNAME=*.SNAME;
4.  If there is an DNSNXT RR in the response that matches WNAME, then we have
    found the source of synthesis, with SNAME being the closest encloser;
5.  Go to step 2.

The validator does not need to check that the closest encloser is from the
proper zone. The authoritative server returned an DNSNXT that matches the
source of synthesis. According to [](#RFC6672), this proves that
the server did not encounter a referral (step 3b of the server algorithm [](#RFC1035)),
nor did it encounter a DNAME (step 3c of the server algorithm [](#RFC1035)).

Now that the validator knows the source of synthesis and thus the closest
encloser, it can derive the next closer name. The validator MUST verify
that there is an DNSNXT RR that covers the next closer name to QNAME, is
present in the response.

Note that, because the response included an DNSNXT that matches the source
of synthesis, we know that there exists data in the zone below the closest
encloser. Therefore, the closest encloser cannot be a delegation, nor can there
exists a DNAME RRset at the closest encloser.

[MM: As an additional check, the validator can verify if the DNSNXT matching
the closest encloser has the Wildcard Flag set.]

## Validating Referrals to Unsigned Subzones

The delegation name in a referral is the owner name of the NS RRSet
present in the authority section of the referral response.

If there is an DNSNXT RR present in the response that matches the
delegation name, then the validator MUST ensure that the NS bit is
set and that the DS bit is not set in the Type Bit Maps field of the
DNSNXT RR. The validator MUST also ensure that the DNSNXT RR is from
the correct (i.e., parent) zone. This is done by ensuring that the
SOA bit is not set in the Type Bit Maps field of this DNSNXT RR.

Note that the presence of an NS bit implies the absence of a DNAME
bit, so there is no need to check for the DNAME bit in the Type Bit
Maps field of the DNSNXT RR.

If there is no DNSNXT RR present that matches the delegation name,
then the validator MUST verify that there is a closest provable encloser 
for the delegation name. In addition, the validator MUST verify that
there is an DNSNXT RR that covers the next closer name and has the
Opt-Out bit set.


<!-- 
## Validator Algorithm

Section 5 of [](#RFC4035) describes how a security-aware resolver can
authenticate DNS responses. Section 5.4 of [](#RFC4035) describes
authenticating of denial of existence responses. 

The following steps describe one possible method of proper validation
of an answer containing DNSNXT RRs.

[TBD]

-->

<!--
1. For each section in the answer:
    * Count the number of RRs in the answer section, call this number "Nans";
    * Count the number of RRs in the authority section, call this number "Nauth".

[MM: This is just ANCOUNT and NSCOUNT?]

2. If "Nans" and "Nauth" are both greater than zero, goto step 5;

3. If "Nans" equals zero and "Nauth" is greater then zero, goto step YY;

4. If both "Nans" and "Nauth" are zero there are no DNSNXT RRs..."Houston, we got a problem", goto step -1;

5. We want to determine if we can proof an expanded wildcard answer or a CNAME/DNAME
   a. dksdskl;
   b. dsjdsjsk;

9. Determine if this is a correct NXDOMAIN answer.
-->

# Resolver Considerations

## DNSNXT Resource Record Caching

The same considerations as described in Section 9.1 of [](#RFC5155) for
NSEC3 apply to DNSNXT.

## Use of the AD Bit

The same considerations as described in Section 9.2 of [](#RFC5155) for
NSEC3 apply to DNSNXT.

# Special Considerations

## Domain Name Length Restrictions

The same considerations as described in Section 10.1 of [](#RFC5155) apply.

## DNAME at the Zone Apex

The DNAME specification in Section 3 of [](#RFC6672) has a
'no-descendants' limitation. If a DNAME RR is present at node N,
there MUST be no data at any descendant of N.

[](#RFC5155) updates the DNAME specification to allow NSEC3 and RRSIG types
at descendants of the apex regardless of the existence of DNAME at the apex.

This document updates the DNAME specification to also allow DNSNXT types
at descendants of the apex regardless of the existence of DNAME at the apex.

## More Special Considerations

Appendix C of [](#RFC5155) clarifies specific behavior and explains
more special considerations for implementations, regarding salting and
hash collisions. These considerations for NSEC3 also apply to DNSNXT.

# IANA Considerations

Although the DNSNXT and DNSNXTPARAM RR formats include a hash algorithm
parameter, this document does not define a particular mechanism for
safely transitioning from one DNSNXT hash algorithm to another. When
specifying a new hash algorithm for use with DNSNXT, a transition
mechanism MUST also be defined.

This document updates the IANA registry "DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM PARAMETERS"
(http://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-parameters) in sub-registry "TYPES",
by defining two new types. [](#the-dnsnxt-resource-record) defines the
DNSNXT RR type [TBD]. [](#the-dnsnxtparam-resource-record) defines the
DNSNXTPARAM RR type [TBD].

This document creates a new IANA registry for DNSNXT flags. This
registry is named "DNSSEC DNSNXT Flags". The initial contents of this
registry are:

      0    1    2    3    4    5    6    7
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
    |    |    |    |    |    |    |Wild|Opt-|
    |    |    |    |    |    |    |card|Out |
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+

    bit 6 is the Wildcard flag.

    bit 7 is the Opt-Out flag.

    bits 0 - 5 are available for assignment.

Assignment of additional DNSNXT Flags in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).

This document creates a new IANA registry for DNSNXTPARAM flags. This
registry is named "DNSSEC DNSNXTPARAM Flags". The initial contents of
this registry are:

      0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 0 |
    +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+

    bit 7 is reserved and must be 0.

    bits 0 - 6 are available for assignment.

Assignment of additional DNSNXTPARAM Flags in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).

Finally, this document creates a new IANA registry for DNSNXT hash
algorithms. This registry is named "DNSSEC DNSNXT Hash Algorithms".
The initial contents of this registry are:

    0 is the Identity function.

    1 is SHA-1.

    2-255 Available for assignment.

Assignment of additional DNSNXT hash algorithms in this registry requires IETF
Standards Action [](#RFC5226).

# Security Considerations

This document does not introduce any new security issues beyond those
already discussed in [](#RFC4033), [](#RFC4034), [](#RFC4035) and [](#RFC5155).

# Acknowledgements
This document would not be possible without the help of Ed Lewis, Roy Arends, 
Wouter Wijngaards, 
Karst Koymans, 
Mohan Parthasarathy,
Marco Davids,
Esther Makaay
and Antoin Verschuren.

# Changelog

[ To be removed to the RFC editor before publication. ]

## -02

* Rename to DNSNXT and DNSNXTPARAM;
* Make Iterations an octet.

## -01

* Clarification throughout the text (Mohan Parthasarathy);
* Add section about empty non-terminals in NSEC, NSEC3 and DNSNXT;
* Rename Zero hashing to Identity function.
* No need for different ordering mechanisms: canonical ordering only.
* Remove section on validator algorithm (already explained in RFC4035).

## -00

* Initial document.
